---
layout: post
title: Forget The Future
comments: true
tags: [future, seoul]
---

*Monday 18 January 2021* 

I’m sitting in the front seat of my sister-in-law’s brand new Hyundai Grandeur on the way to my wife’s hospital appointment early on a Monday morning, cruising though commuter traffic in Seoul, along a tributary of the great Han river that flows through the city. The car's dashboard is state-of-the-art: the widescreen navigation system is the size of my laptop and auto-zooms in and out as we approach intersections, while the on-board entertainment module looks like the interface of a home theater system. As the urban landscape scrolls smoothly past in an endless loop of high-rise apartment complexes and riverside exercise parks, I watch the other, very similar black and white cars gliding smoothly around us, and find myself wondering what all this will look like a hundred years from now. And it occurs to me that it will probably not look all that different from how it does today. There will still be no [flying cars](https://thebaffler.com/salvos/of-flying-cars-and-the-declining-rate-of-profit), for the same economic and logistical reasons there are no flying cars now; cars themselves will almost certainly still be around, though, powered by today’s alternative energy sources: electric, hydrogen, solar (probably still not wind). The apartment villages will also likely still be around, in higher, more futuristic form. In spite of a century of further global warming, viral pandemics, and inevitably, wars; in spite of the continued expansion of environmentally-responsible, low-tech, post-capitalist lifestyles, centuries-old habits die hard. As my sister-in-law’s car shows, while technologies change, in modern societies human needs remain pretty consistent: automation, seamless mobility, continuous connectivity, convenience stores, online shopping, home delivery, streaming entertainment. In many ways, the hikikomori life under lockdown over the past year has already given us a preview of what life will be like in the coming century: biocitizenship, social control, auto-surveillance, remote interfaces. Welcome to the future. On our network screens, people keep reminding us that even when the present pandemic ends - if it even does - life from now on will never be the same as it was before. Because one guy twenty years ago concealed a bomb in his shoe before boarding an airliner, we now all have to go barefoot through airport security.

In thinking about the future, we tend to forget the inertia of the status quo: a kind of structural viscosity that is resistant to sudden social transformation and seeks to preserve existing power and economic relations. We know that such transformations can happen and have happened historically, of course, but in the larger scheme of things they belong to the same order as earthquakes or plane crashes: freak events that are catastrophic but relatively rare.

So ultimately, I don’t think speculating about the future, either in utopian or dystopian terms, is all that interesting, because I think the future - at least the foreseeable future -  is going to look very much like the present, albeit with cooler-looking technology. At this point, modernity is a train that has come off the tracks, but continues to plough on regardlessly: while capitalist realism may be an ideology, as [Mark Fisher](https://www.johnhuntpublishing.com/zer0-books/our-books/capitalist-realism) has convincingly demonstrated, modernity itself is a much larger vehicle, a juggernaut driven by economic logics rather than ethical or environmental concerns. In this still modern, capitalist world, it remains  unimaginable that a hundred years from now the high-rise complexes, the freeways, the commuter traffic, and the exercise parks will have been replaced by an arcadia of green spaces, intentional communities, solarpunk bike messengers, non-plastic-clogged oceans, and resurgent animal species. Some of these things will hopefully exist parallel to the viscous world, of course, and we must not relax our efforts to achieve them. But achieving them will require a continuous struggle against the forces of inertia, the vested interests of the political and economic incumbents. And we should be under no illusions about the forces of inertia that any effort to imagine - let alone realize - a less alienating, more just, more fulfilling world will be up against.

Forty years ago, the French social theorist and arch-provocateur Jean Baudrillard, in a typical act of philosophical heresy, invited us to forget the work of the great social historian Michel Foucault, in a work simply titled in English [*Forget Foucault*](http://semiotexte.com/?p=704) (the French *Oublier Foucault*, "forgetting Foucault," is less blunt). To propose a similar act of forgetting in the case of the future might seem perverse, given that forgetting itself is something that in theory at least could only be done to something that has already happened, not what has not yet happened. But the future itself has a history, and that history shows that we have been wrong about the future many times before. So that is why I propose that we need to forget about the future, remember that we live only in the present, and focus on improving things there first, if we are to make a better world, whether tomorrow or a hundred years from now.