---
layout: post
title: Specters of Media Studies
comments: true
tags: [media]
---

My old friend [Hugh Gusterson](https://anth.ubc.ca/profile/hugh-gusterson/), an  anthropology professor at UBC, asked me on Facebook for my thoughts on Mark Dery's  [article](https://www.chronicle.com/article/the-professor-of-paranoia?utm_source=Iterable&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=campaign_2350474_nl_Academe-Today_date_20210518&cid=at&source=&sourceId=&fbclid=IwAR0Rr9PT0KZu608wBgdNmXrmHsOg97GH7ngECXjsE0svXo8-0_spds6y-Qw) about the latest imbroglio at NYU, this time involving not [Avital Ronell](https://www.chronicle.com/article/i-worked-with-avital-ronell-i-believe-her-accuser/) but media professor/conspiracy theorist Mark Crispin Miller. 

I must admit that I hadn't heard about this particular shitstorm - we lead sheltered lives on the internet - but as chance would have it, I taught for a number of years in Miller's department and even occasionally shared an elevator with the defendant. At that time, Neil Postman was still chair of what was grandly known as the Department of Media Ecology (not in the contemporary sense), so I'm broadly familiar with - albeit not sympathetic to - the particular current of media criticism that Miller represents. Anyhow, for what it's worth, here's my first take on Dery's article, which since it was - like most such reflections - too long for Facebook's attention span, I might as well put here.

>"Was there always a conspiratorial undertow to media studies, a paranoid style of mind that might make the transition from 'media monopoly' to 'deep state' easier than it seems?" 

As if we needed an answer. As if, indeed, we needed yet another nail in the coffin of media studies, the academic discipline that everyone outside it has loved to hate for the past forty years. That narrative may be somewhat plausible of the U.S. version of the field, arguably just an update of old-school U.S. communication studies: propaganda, psy-ops, the hidden persuaders, corporate oligarchies, mind control: Postman, Miller, Todd Gitlin, Terry Moran, Ben Bagdikian, Noam Chomsky, Ed Herman, Bob McChesney - this has always been a men-only club.

The problem is that narrative also conflates that club with the field in its entirety, as if an entire generation of scholarship from the UK, Australia, India, Asia, and Latin America - much of which has carried out a comprehensive critique of the premises of US comm studies - had simply never existed. In this worldview, the work of Stuart Hall, Paul Gilroy, Angela McRobbie, John Fiske, Toby Miller, Ien Ang, Meaghan Morris, John Frow, Rey Chow, Ken Gelder, Ariel Dorfman, Nestor García Canclini, Arjun Appadurai, and many more are presumably deemed to belong to cultural studies rather than media studies "proper" - despite Dery's description of media studies as a "genre-hopping, metadiscursive field." 

I suspect that some of the pronouncements I heard from Neil Postman's mouth at the time might not have stood up well to Dery's scrutiny either, but 9/11 and Sandy Hook hadn't happened yet and even Neil wasn't advocating that the moon landing was shot on a soundstage. He was just what we younger types called "old school," the way Miller is - at 71 -  also old school, albeit in this case several steps closer to full-on Roswell.

So in this narrowly US-centric idea of media studies - which I would call communication studies - someone like Miller becomes just another way of taking out an entire academic field, adding to the journalistic choir seeking to make media studies - or what it takes media studies to be - the unwitting enabler of truther conspiracy theories and cancel culture. After all, why is at a problem, really, if Miller is also being held to account for transphobia in addition to promoting conspiracy theories, as if that was merely an irrelevant detail? 

So while I'm basically sympathetic to Dery's line of argument, I'm also dismayed to see how smoothly it equates Miller's embrace of conspiracy theories with the malaise of the field more generally. That said, I think his conspiracy thinking is less anomalous among "credible and credentialed" sources than Dery seems to believe (I'm looking at you, Adam Curtis). But that doesn't justify equating it with the discipline more generally. Critiques of conspiracy culture itself have for some time now been a significant sub-field of media studies - as well they might. Does Avital Ronell mean that continental theory is just a power trip? Does a Columbia professor of Korean Studies being [exposed as a plagiarist](http://sthelepress.com/index.php/2016/09/13/revoking-a-recommendation-b-r-myers/)  mean that the entire field is corrupt?

Conspiracy theories are like cults: you can't just argue people out of them because they're impermeable to argumentation or evidence: you're just treated as part of the conspiracy. It reminds me of a story a college chaplain told me many years ago, about trying to reason with a guy who believed he was the reincarnation of Jesus: "yes, they tried to tell me I wasn't the Messiah two thousand years ago." While hopefully even Miller is not labouring under that kind of misapprehension, to treat his idiosyncrasies as representative of the malaise of the academic field at large seems like its own particular kind of pathology: the desire, once and for all, to lay the specter of media studies to rest. 

But if there's one thing that the media studies sub-field known as hauntology has taught us, it's that vampires, zombies, and other phantoms aren't so easily banished  from the collective imagination; indeed, what I find most shocking about Miller's views is  how familiar, almost conventional they are in the teeming social media ecosystem. What Erik Davis calls "High Weirdness" is today not nearly as outlandish as he and many others like to tell each other on their podcasts. I thus see Miller less as a deranged lone shooter and more like a sign o' the times. What I do find quite weird is that as an early adopter of Afrofuturism, Dery acts like the Harvard kid who wanders into the bar of the New Weird America and is surprised to discover Miller hanging out with the locals. Maybe it just started out as participant observation, but he would hardly be the first ethnographer to end up going native.